PINTOS

**1.**     **Task: Implement the Threading Component of Pintos OS**

In this project, your team is asked to perform **“kernel” level
programming of the “Threading” component in the Pintos operation
system.** This project will help you to better understand threading,
synchronization, and scheduling concepts.

Pintos is a simple operating system framework for the 80*x*86
architecture developed at Stanford University. It is considered as a
successor of the Nachos instructional OS from UC-Berkeley. You will be
given a functional OS with minimally functional thread system. Your job
is to extend the functionality of this system to gain a better
understanding of synchronization problems.

Before beginning this assignment, make sure you read these sections from
Pintos Reference Guide: section [A.1 Pintos
Loading](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_6.html#SEC91),
[A.2
Threads](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_6.html#SEC96),
[A.3
Synchronization](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_6.html#SEC100),
and [Appendix B (4.4BSD
Scheduler)](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_7.html#SEC131).

**2.**     **Setting Up The Pintos Environment**

We have prepared a VM image of Pintos which will make the
installation/configuration process much simpler for you. This will
enable you to develop your pintos project on any Linux, Windows, or Mac
system (i.e. your own machine) without mush hassle. You can download the
VM image at the following link:
<http://ftp.cse.buffalo.edu/CSE421/UB-pintos.ova>

You will need VirtualBox software for your host OS to run this VM. You
can download VirtualBox at the following link:
<https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads>

For the detailed instruction on how to setup this VM on your host OS,
please see the "Guide for Pintos Installation on Your System" which is
posted on Piazza:
<https://piazza.com/class_profile/get_resource/jl1tpqik41v1ic/jleokidq4783x8>

In VirtualBox software, from the File menu, choose "Import Appliance"
and point to the downloaded "UB-pintos.ova". You do not need to change
any other settings for this procedure. Choose UB-Pintos from the left
pane, and click on "Start", your virtual machine should now boot and get
you to a login page, which requires the following username/password
combination to login:

Username: os-class

Password: cse421521

To learn how to run, debug and test Pintos code, please read the [Pintos
Introduction](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_1.html).

\

\

**3. Implementation of the Project**

\

You will be working primarily in the “threads” directory of the source
tree for this assignment, with some work in the “devices” directory on
the side. Compilation should be done in the “threads” directory.

**4.1 Understanding Threads**

The first step is to read and understand the code for the initial thread
system. Pintos already implements thread creation and thread completion,
a simple scheduler to switch between threads, and synchronization
primitives (semaphores, locks, condition variables, and optimization
barriers).

Some of this code might seem slightly mysterious. If you haven't already
compiled and run the base system, as described in the introduction (see
section [1.
Introduction](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_1.html#SEC1)),
you should do so now. You can read through parts of the source code to
see what's going on. If you like, you can add calls to printf() almost
anywhere, then recompile and run to see what happens and in what order.
You can also run the kernel in a debugger and set breakpoints at
interesting spots, single-step through code and examine data, and so on.

When a thread is created, you are creating a new context to be
scheduled. You provide a function to be run in this context as an
argument to thread\_create(). The first time the thread is scheduled and
runs, it starts from the beginning of that function and executes in that
context. When the function returns, the thread terminates. Each thread,
therefore, acts like a mini-program running inside Pintos, with the
function passed to thread\_create() acting like main().

At any given time, exactly one thread runs and the rest, if any, become
inactive. The scheduler decides which thread to run next. (If no thread
is ready to run at any given time, then the special "idle" thread,
implemented in idle(), runs.) Synchronization primitives can force
context switches when one thread needs to wait for another thread to do
something.

The mechanics of a context switch are in “threads/switch.S”, which is
80*x*86 assembly code. (You don't have to understand it.) It saves the
state of the currently running thread and restores the state of the
thread we're switching to.

Using the GDB debugger, slowly trace through a context switch to see
what happens (see section [E.5
GDB](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_10.html#SEC151)).
You can set a breakpoint on schedule() to start out, and then
single-step from there. Be sure to keep track of each thread's address
and state, and what procedures are on the call stack for each thread.
You will notice that when one thread calls switch\_threads(), another
thread starts running, and the first thing the new thread does is to
return from switch\_threads(). You will understand the thread system
once you understand why and how the switch\_threads() that gets called
is different from the switch\_threads() that returns. See section [A.2.3
Thread
Switching](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_6.html#SEC99),
for more information.

**Warning:** In Pintos, each thread is assigned a small, fixed-size
execution stack just under 4 kB in size. The kernel tries to detect
stack overflow, but it cannot do so perfectly. You may cause bizarre
problems, such as mysterious kernel panics, if you declare large data
structures as non-static local variables, e.g. “int buf\[1000\];”.
Alternatives to stack allocation include the page allocator and the
block allocator (see section [A.5 Memory
Allocation](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_6.html#SEC111)).

**4.2 Source Files**

For a brief overview of the files in the “threads/” directory, please
see “[Section 2.1.2 Source
Files](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_2.html#SEC18)”
in the Pintos Reference Guide. You will not need to modify most of this
code, but the hope is that overviewing this section will give you a
start on what code to look at. Also, please take a quick look at the
files in the “devices/” and “lib/” directories of the pintos source
tree.

**4.3 Synchronization**

Proper synchronization is an important part of the solutions to these
problems. Any synchronization problem can be easily solved by turning
interrupts off: while interrupts are off, there is no concurrency, so
there's no possibility for race conditions. Therefore, it's tempting to
solve all synchronization problems this way, but **don't**. Instead, use
semaphores, locks, and condition variables to solve the bulk of your
synchronization problems. Read the tour section on synchronization (see
section [A.3
Synchronization](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_6.html#SEC100))
or the comments in “threads/synch.c” if you're unsure what
synchronization primitives may be used in what situations. **Any
implementation turning the interrupts off for synchronization purposes,
will not get full credits!**

In the Pintos projects, the **only class of problem best solved by
disabling interrupts** is coordinating data shared between a kernel
thread and an interrupt handler. Because interrupt handlers can't sleep,
they can't acquire locks. This means that data shared between kernel
threads and an interrupt handler must be protected within a kernel
thread by turning off interrupts.

This project only requires accessing a little bit of thread state from
interrupt handlers. For the alarm clock, the timer interrupt needs to
wake up sleeping threads. In the advanced scheduler, the timer interrupt
needs to access a few global and per-thread variables. When you access
these variables from kernel threads, you will need to disable interrupts
to prevent the timer interrupt from interfering.

When you do turn off interrupts, take care to do so for the least amount
of code possible, or you can end up losing important things such as
timer ticks or input events. Turning off interrupts also increases the
interrupt handling latency, which can make a machine feel sluggish if
taken too far.

The synchronization primitives themselves in “synch.c” are implemented
by disabling interrupts. You may need to increase the amount of code
that runs with interrupts disabled here, but you should still try to
keep it to a minimum.

Disabling interrupts can be useful for debugging, if you want to make
sure that a section of code is not interrupted. You should remove
debugging code before turning in your project. (Don't just comment it
out, because that can make the code difficult to read.)

**There should be no busy waiting in your submission**. A tight loop
that calls thread\_yield() is one form of busy waiting.

**4.4 Alarm Clock**

[]{#_GoBack} Reimplement timer\_sleep(), defined in “devices/timer.c”.
Although a working implementation is provided, it "busy waits," that is,
it spins in a loop checking the current time and calling thread\_yield()
until enough time has gone by. **Reimplement it to avoid busy waiting.
Any implementation using busy-waiting will not get full credits!**

Function: void **timer\_sleep** (int64\_t *ticks*) -- Suspends execution
of the calling thread until time has advanced by at least *x* timer
ticks. Unless the system is otherwise idle, the thread need not wake up
after exactly *x* ticks. Just put it on the ready queue after they have
waited for the right amount of time.

timer\_sleep() is useful for threads that operate in real-time, e.g. for
blinking the cursor once per second.

The argument to timer\_sleep() is expressed in timer ticks, not in
milliseconds or any another unit. There are TIMER\_FREQ timer ticks per
second, where TIMER\_FREQ is a macro defined in devices/timer.h. The
default value is 100. We don't recommend changing this value, because
any change is likely to cause many of the tests to fail.

Separate functions timer\_msleep(), timer\_usleep(), and timer\_nsleep()
do exist for sleeping a specific number of milliseconds, microseconds,
or nanoseconds, respectively, but these will call timer\_sleep()
automatically when necessary. You do not need to modify them.

If your delays seem too short or too long, reread the explanation of the
“-r” option to pintos (see section [1.1.4 Debugging versus
Testing](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_1.html#SEC6)).

**4.5 Priority Scheduler**

Implement priority scheduling in Pintos. When a thread is added to the
ready list that has a higher priority than the currently running thread,
the current thread should immediately yield the processor to the new
thread. Similarly, when threads are waiting for a lock, semaphore, or
condition variable, the highest priority waiting thread should be
awakened first. A thread may raise or lower its own priority at any
time, but lowering its priority such that it no longer has the highest
priority must cause it to immediately yield the CPU.

Thread priorities range from PRI\_MIN (0) to PRI\_MAX (63). Lower
numbers correspond to lower priorities, so that priority 0 is the lowest
priority and priority 63 is the highest. The initial thread priority is
passed as an argument to thread\_create(). If there's no reason to
choose another priority, use PRI\_DEFAULT (31). The PRI\_ macros are
defined in “threads/thread.h”, and you should not change their values.

One issue with priority scheduling is "priority inversion". Consider
high, medium, and low priority threads *H*, *M*, and *L*, respectively.
If *H* needs to wait for *L* (for instance, for a lock held by *L*), and
*M* is on the ready list, then *H* will never get the CPU because the
low priority thread will not get any CPU time. A partial fix for this
problem is for *H* to "donate" its priority to *L* while *L* is holding
the lock, then recall the donation once *L* releases (and thus *H*
acquires) the lock.

Implement priority donation. You will need to account for all different
situations in which priority donation is required. Be sure to handle
multiple donations, in which multiple priorities are donated to a single
thread. You must also handle nested donation: if *H* is waiting on a
lock that *M* holds and *M* is waiting on a lock that *L* holds, then
both *M* and *L* should be boosted to *H*'s priority. If necessary, you
may impose a reasonable limit on depth of nested priority donation, such
as 8 levels.

You must implement priority donation for locks. You need not implement
priority donation for the other Pintos synchronization constructs. You
do need to implement priority scheduling in all cases.

Finally, implement the following functions that allow a thread to
examine and modify its own priority. Skeletons for these functions are
provided in “threads/thread.c”.

Function: void **thread\_set\_priority** (int *new\_priority*) -- Sets
the current thread's priority to *new\_priority*. If the current thread
no longer has the highest priority, yields.

Function: int **thread\_get\_priority** (void) -- Returns the current
thread's priority. In the presence of priority donation, returns the
higher (donated) priority.

You need not provide any interface to allow a thread to directly modify
other threads' priorities.

**4.6 Multilevel Feedback Queue Scheduler**

Implement a multilevel feedback queue scheduler similar to the 4.4BSD
scheduler to reduce the average response time for running jobs on your
system. See section [B. 4.4BSD
Scheduler](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_7.html#SEC131),
for detailed requirements.

Like the priority scheduler, the advanced scheduler chooses the thread
to run based on priorities. However, the advanced scheduler does not do
priority donation. Thus, we recommend that you have the priority
scheduler working, except possibly for priority donation, before you
start work on the advanced scheduler.

You must write your code to allow us to choose a scheduling algorithm
policy at Pintos startup time. By default, the priority scheduler must
be active, but we must be able to choose the 4.4BSD scheduler with the
“-mlfqs” kernel option. Passing this option sets thread\_mlfqs, declared
in “threads/thread.h”, to true when the options are parsed by
parse\_options(), which happens early in main().

When the 4.4BSD scheduler is enabled, threads no longer directly control
their own priorities. The *priority* argument to thread\_create() should
be ignored, as well as any calls to thread\_set\_priority(), and
thread\_get\_priority() should return the thread's current priority as
set by the scheduler.

**5. Testing**

Your project grade will be based on our tests. Each project has several
tests, each of which has a name beginning with “tests”. To completely
test your submission, invoke “make check” from the project “build”
directory. This will build and run each test and print a "pass" or
"fail" message for each one. When a test fails, make check also prints
some details of the reason for failure. After running all the tests,
make check also prints a summary of the test results.

\

You can also run individual tests one at a time. A given test *t* writes
its output to “*t*.output”, then a script scores the output as "pass" or
"fail" and writes the verdict to “*t*.result”. To run and grade a single
test, make the “.result” file explicitly from the “build” directory,
e.g. make tests/threads/alarm-multiple.result. If make says that the
test result is up-to-date, but you want to re-run it anyway, either run
make clean or delete the “.output” file by hand.

\

By default, each test provides feedback only at completion, not during
its run. If you prefer, you can observe the progress of each test by
specifying “VERBOSE=1” on the make command line, as in make check
VERBOSE=1. You can also provide arbitrary options to the pintos run by
the tests with “PINTOSOPTS='...'”, e.g. make check PINTOSOPTS='-j 1' to
select a jitter value of 1 (see section [1.1.4 Debugging versus
Testing](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_1.html#SEC6)).

\

All of the tests and related files are in “pintos/src/tests”.

\

**6. Design Document**

\

Before you turn in your project, you must copy the [Project 1 Design
Document Template
(threads.tmpl)](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/threads.tmpl)
into your source tree under the name “pintos/src/threads/DESIGNDOC” and
fill it in. We recommend that you read the design document template
before you start working on the project. See section [D. Project
Documentation](http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/tkosar/cse421-521_fall2013/projects/project-2/WWW/pintos_9.html#SEC142),
for a sample design document that goes along with a fictitious project.
You will need to decide and describe the main data structures,
algorithms, and synchronization mechanisms that you are using / planning
to use for each component of the project.

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

**7. Grading**

\

The grading of the project will be done according to the following
rubric (93 points for the implementation + 12 points for the design
document = TOTAL 105 points):

\

-   -   -   -   

\

Run **“make grade”** to see how many total points the student receives
from implementation (out of 93):

\

Functionality and robustness of alarm clock
(tests/threads/Rubric.alarm):

4 / 4 tests/threads/alarm-single

4 / 4 tests/threads/alarm-multiple

4 / 4 tests/threads/alarm-simultaneous

4 / 4 tests/threads/alarm-priority

1 / 1 tests/threads/alarm-zero

1 / 1 tests/threads/alarm-negative

\

Functionality of priority scheduler (tests/threads/Rubric.priority):

3/ 3 tests/threads/priority-change

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-preempt

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-fifo

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-sema

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-condvar

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-donate-one

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-donate-multiple

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-donate-multiple2

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-donate-nest

5 / 5 tests/threads/priority-donate-chain

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-donate-sema

3 / 3 tests/threads/priority-donate-lower

\

Functionality of advanced scheduler (tests/threads/Rubric.mlfqs):

5 / 5 tests/threads/mlfqs-load-1

5 / 5 tests/threads/mlfqs-load-60

3 / 3 tests/threads/mlfqs-load-avg

5 / 5 tests/threads/mlfqs-recent-1

5 / 5 tests/threads/mlfqs-fair-2

3 / 3 tests/threads/mlfqs-fair-20

4 / 4 tests/threads/mlfqs-nice-2

2 / 2 tests/threads/mlfqs-nice-10

5 / 5 tests/threads/mlfqs-block

\

-   -   

\

**8. What to Submit?**

 

1.  

The design document is due **October 1**^**st**^ **@11:59pm.**

\

The submission of the design document should be done using your
“submit\_cse421” or “submit\_cse521” script. (\* NOTE: The submit
scripts will only be used for the design document submission, not for
the actual project source code submission. Please see below \*).

\

2.  

\

The project source code submission is due **October
21**^**st**^**@11:59pm.**

\

The submission of the project source code will be done using our
department’s **AutoLab** (<https://autograder.cse.buffalo.edu/)> system,
which will allow you to see your grade even before submitting the
project. The detailed instructions on this will be provided later.

\

\

\

\

\

 

\

<div title="footer">

[ ]{#Frame1 dir="ltr"
style="position: absolute; top: 0in; left: 0in; width: 0.02in; border: none; padding: 0in; background: #ffffff"}

Page: 7/7

\

</div>
